hello maths fans dr tom crawford here
from the university of oxford
explaining how to use the method of the
discriminant
to classify critical points for a
function of two variables
last time we saw how to find the
location
of the critical points by solving for
the
partial x and partial y derivatives
both equal to zero now for this
particular function
f of x y is x squared plus 2xy
minus y squared plus y cubed we went
through this calculation
and we found that our critical points
were located at zero
zero and at minus four thirds and four
thirds and now what we want to do is to
be able to
classify what type of critical point
we have at each of these locations for a
function of two variables
there are three different types of
critical point
that we can see so we have a
maximum and if you plot
z equals minus x
squared minus y
squared if you enter this equation into
your maple calculator app
it will show something that looks like a
large hill
and the point at the top zero zero will
be your maximum
we can also have a minimum which
is represented by z equals
x squared plus y squared
so again if you plot this in your maple
calculator
app you will get something that looks
like a valley or a bowl
shape with zero zero occurring at the
very bottom of that bowl
being your minimum point and then we
have the saddle
which can be shown by plotting
z is equal to x squared
minus y squared so what we've done here
is make
the x squared and y squared terms have
alternate
signs and this as the name suggests
looks like a horse's saddle
or if you're like me and you enjoy
pringles it kind of looks like
a pringle so now we know what the
critical points look like
we can start to answer the question
about how to classify them
and in order to do this we are once
again going to take some inspiration
from the function of one variable case
so to start with let's consider a local
maximum so for a function of one
variable this is x and f of x
and a local maximum looks something like
this now the maximum occurs on the very
peak of our hill or our mountain
and the reason this is a local maximum
is that this point on the top let's call
it
x zero the value of the function
at x zero
f of x zero is actually greater
than any other value of the function
f so is actually greater than f of x
provided x is close
to x zero so we can say that f x
naught is greater than f of x
for all inverted commas
nearby points x
now a local minimum works very much in
the same way
except at the local minimum which of
course
would have this shape and let's suppose
this is at
x1 then for our local minimum
the value of f at that point must be
smaller than all surrounding nearby
points so at our minimum
f of x1 is
less than f of x
for all nearby points x once again
so what this means overall is that
at a maximum
our function f is always decreasing
away from our local maximum
so a max corresponds to the function
decreasing away from
the maximum and similarly the minimum
corresponds to the function increasing
away
from the minimum therefore to check
whether we have a
maximum or a minimum critical point
we just in fact need to check is our
function
decreasing away from the critical point
or is our function increasing
and this is where the second derivative
comes into play now the second
derivative
f double dashed or double prime of x
this is the rate of change of
the derivative or the rate of change of
your
gradient with respect to x
now the way the second derivative
relates to our maximum
and our minimum is to do with the fact
that
at the critical point we know already
that the gradient is zero so the
condition to be
a critical point and therefore to be a
max or a min
was you have to be a turning point of
your graph
which means your gradient passes through
zero
at the critical point and so as we move
let's say in the positive x direction
as we move to the right the gradient
begins at zero
and it's going to change now
there are two things that can happen
here the gradient
can move to a positive value from zero
to some positive
number or it can move from zero to some
negative number now if the gradient
being at 0 moves to a positive number
then it is increasing and
if it is increasing that means moving in
the positive
x direction you're going on an upwards
slope so the gradient here is zero
as we move to the right the gradient
increases and moves along this positive
slope so an increasing
gradient here tells us that
it's a minimum and then for our maximum
as we move to the right our gradient
goes negative and we move
downhill away from this function
so our gradient is decreasing
so decreasing corresponds to
a maximum now remember
the second derivative is the
change in your gradient so
here at a minimum we start at
zero gradient and then as we move to the
right
our gradient increases so our gradient
the change in our gradient is positive
it goes from zero
to a positive number so that means our
second derivative at a minimum
is positive so here
f dash dashed of x is
positive and similarly
at the maximum we start at gradient zero
and as we move to the right we go to a
negative value
so the value of the gradient has
decreased
and therefore the decrease here
corresponds to f dash dash of x
being negative so a maximum
is determined by a negative
second derivative and a minimum
is determined by a positive second
derivative but how does this work for
our function of
two variables so we can see from
our plot of the maximum that
the function is actually decreasing in
all directions
away from our maximum critical point
so this means all of our second
derivatives
actually will need to be negative so for
our function of
one variable there was only one second
order derivative
that we can calculate and when that was
negative
we had a maximum now for our function of
two variables
there are several second order partial
derivatives
that we can calculate and at a maximum
we're actually going to need all of them
to be negative because we need our
function to be decreasing away
in all directions as we can see on the
plot
so that means that f x x
must be negative we need f
y y to be negative
and also the mixed partial f
x y which is equal to f y
x for a continuous function that
must also be negative so
all three second order partial
derivatives
must be negative for the critical point
in a function of two variables to be a
maximum similarly looking at the picture
for a minimum
we can see that the function is
increasing
in all directions away from our critical
point
and so at a minimum we're going to need
all of our second order partial
derivatives
to be positive so f
x x f y
y and f x
y which equals f y x assuming it's
continuous
they must all be positive
for a minimum now the saddle is a little
bit
trickier we can see from our 3d
plot that in some directions the
function is clearly
increasing whilst in others it is
clearly decreasing
so there's not necessarily going to be a
universal
sign or a universal rule as simple as
this
for the second order partials in order
to determine a saddle point
and in fact what we need to do here is
to use a
two variable taylor expansion for a
function of one variable
the taylor expansion is as follows
so this is just the first three terms in
the taylor expansion so f of x is f of x
naught
plus x minus x naught f dashed at x
plus x minus x naught squared times f
double dash
at x naught divided by 2 and we carry on
in this way as you might expect the
taylor expansion
in two variables is very similar
except now we're going to have to do
partial derivatives
in each of the two variables
so we have f
at x and y
is equal to f
at x naught y
naught so this is our zeroth order term
much like f of x naught plus
x minus x
naught times df by dx
so fx evaluated
at x naught y naught
plus y
minus y naught times df by d
y evaluated at x naught y naught
that will be our first order term with
our first order
partial derivatives plus
the second order term which again has a
very similar structure
this was going to be x minus x naught
squared over two
and then now we have f x
x at x naught
y naught plus
y minus y naught squared
f over to f
y y at x naught y naught
and then we have the mixed term which is
plus two lots of x
minus x naught y minus y naught
all over two times
f x y at x naught
y naught plus the third order
and higher terms now remembering that
at a critical point x naught y naught
the first derivatives are zero
by definition of it being a critical
point
these two terms will vanish we can then
actually take this first term across to
the left hand side
make that a minus and then this is now
equals this
so what we have is f of x y minus
f of x naught y naught is now equal to
these three
second order terms plus higher order
terms we're actually going to neglect
the higher order
and say that this is in fact
approximately
equal to and then we'll get rid of
those higher order terms the next step
involves various bits of algebra to
simplify the equation
including dividing through by the
non-zero f x
x and completing the square i'm going to
skip
over these steps in the video but i've
created a worksheet on maple learn
which explains step by step how to
obtain the final equation
you can follow along for yourself at the
link on screen
what we end up with is this equation
and this is going to be the key to
classification
of our critical points so we have that f
of x
y minus f at our critical point
f of x naught y naught is approximately
equal to
1 over 2 f x x assuming f x x is
non-zero because otherwise i couldn't
divide by it
then here we've just got something which
is positive
because it's a whole term here squared
so this entire bracket is always going
to be positive
then we also have something positive
here
with y minus y naught squared and then
we're just left with this term
f x x f y y minus
f x y squared and this
is going to be our discriminant
so going back to the left hand side of
our equation
and thinking about what we did in the
one variable case
earlier if i'm at
let's say a maximum then i know that
the value at
my critical point x naught y naught
has to be bigger than any surrounding
x y point so for a maximum
this left-hand side of my equation is
going to be
negative because i have a function
here which is smaller nearby points are
always smaller
than the critical point that's the max
so for a maximum
the left-hand side of my equation must
be
negative now that of course
means the right-hand side must also be
negative
so this term here we've already said is
always positive
because it's squared this term
over here is positive
because it's a y minus y naught squared
now we have an fxx at the beginning
which could have either sign but earlier
when discussing
what we expect to happen at a maximum we
said that
the second derivatives must be negative
because the function decreases
away from our maximum point so this we
actually expect to be
negative so this f x x for a maximum
is negative so
now we have negative times positive so
that's negative
then we have the discriminant and then
something else that's also
positive so what that means is that in
fact our discriminant must be
positive because if our discriminant is
positive
everything inside the square bracket now
has a fixed
sign everything in the square bracket is
positive
multiplied by the negative
f x x second derivative that means the
whole right hand side is negative
therefore the left hand side is also
negative and we do indeed have
our maximum so just to reiterate
for a maximum we must have f
x x being negative
and we need the discriminant
x x times f y y
minus f x y squared
this must be positive now for the
minimum
we expect the left hand side of our
equation
in the case of a minimum this must be
positive because for
x naught y naught to be a minimal
critical point for it to be a minimum at
the
bottom of that bowl or valley
then all nearby points x y must be
bigger
than the critical point so therefore
this
f x y minus the minimum must always be
positive so now we need to think how do
we ensure
that the right hand side of our equation
is always positive
and it's very similar to what we see for
the maximum
so again this term is squared
so this is always positive that will
never change sign
the term on the end y minus y naught
squared again it's always positive
the discriminant could be positive or
negative
however we again need it
to be positive because if it's positive
everything in the square bracket has a
fixed sign it is all
positive and therefore to make the
entire equation
positive we just need f x x to be
positive and we actually said this
earlier we said that
for a minimum we expect
the second order partial derivatives to
all be
positive because we're increasing away
from that minimal point
so for a minimum we need f x x
to be positive and
the discriminant again
must be positive so you'll notice in
both of these cases
the discriminant is positive
and we just determine whether we have a
maximum or a minimum
by the sign of f x x
it is worth pointing out that we could
have instead of factoring out f
x x i could have factored out f y y
it ever so slightly changes this the
discriminant is unchanged
and so you can either have f x
x being negative and a positive
discriminant
for a maximum that could also be fyy
being negative
and a positive discriminant and
similarly you could check the sign of
fyy
for the minimum it doesn't matter if you
check one of f
x x or f y y if you have a positive
discriminant
the sign of f x x or f y y either one
will determine if you have a max or a
min
now finally for the saddle point
this covers the other possible case
so we've covered the sign of the
term at the very beginning outside of
the square bracket
those two cases are determining the max
or the min
when the discriminant is positive so the
saddle will actually happen
when the discriminant is negative
so for the saddle
we just have to have and this is the
only condition that's actually required
is your discriminant must now be
negative
so f x x f y y
minus f x y squared
is negative now with the saddle
the negative discriminant means the sign
of the right hand side could be positive
or could be negative
so it definitely is not a max it's not a
min
but we do know we do know that we are at
a critical point because x naught and y
naught is a critical point that's where
we're doing this calculation
so if it's not a max and it's not a min
it has to be
a saddle so in summary to classify
the type of critical point for a
function of two variables
you have to calculate first of all the
discriminant
f x x f y y minus f x y
squared you evaluate this at your
critical point
x naught y naught if your discriminant
is
negative you have a saddle
if the discriminant is positive
then you have to also look at the sign
of either f x x or
f y y if the sign of your second
derivative
is negative you have a max if it's
positive
you have a min so again
calculate your discriminant negative
sign of the discriminant means saddle
if the discriminant is positive
calculate one of the other second
derivatives
and the sign of that tells you if you
have a max or a min
so finally let's apply our newfound
knowledge
our classification system for critical
points
of functions of two variables let's
apply this
to this function f of x y is
x squared plus 2xy minus y squared plus
y cubed
to the critical points zero zero and
minus four
thirds four thirds which we found in
part one
of this video so we already calculated
df by dx but we can quickly do that
again
we're going to get 2 x
plus 2 y for the
x partial derivative we know the y
partial derivative df by d dy again we
calculated this before
as 2x minus 2y
plus 3 y squared
now our classification system
using the discriminant requires us to
know f x
x f y y and f x y
so let's calculate those from these two
first order derivatives
so f x x means taking another
x derivative of this so this is the only
term with an x
so i'll just get 2
f y y means taking the y
derivative of this function
so that will give me i'll get minus 2
from that term so minus 2
and then i've got plus 6y
from there and then
i also need to know f x y or f y
x which is equal for a continuous
function like this
so f x and then differentiate with
respect to y
is going to give me just two
so f x y is
two and let's just do a sanity check if
i'd done
df by d y and differentiated this with
respect to x i would also just get
2. so it does hold as we expect because
it's a continuous function
now we need to calculate
or evaluate these three second order
derivatives
at the critical point so
f x y is always two f x x is always two
now at zero zero what are we going to
get so at zero
0 the discriminant
let's call it d is going to be equal to
f x x times f y y so that's
2 times fyy which is
minus 2 when you substitute in y equals
naught
so i've got 2 times -2 so that's minus 4
and then we subtract off f of x y
squared so f of x y is 2 squared is 4.
so it's minus 4 minus 4 so that's minus
8.
so the discriminant is negative so for 0
0 we have a negative discriminant
so our classification system says that
must be a
saddle so zero zero is therefore a
saddle point
now for minus four thirds
and four thirds
the discriminant d is equal to
we need to know f x x which again is two
multiplied by f y y
so now we have minus two plus six
lots of y so y is four
thirds so this is minus two
plus six times four thirds
so six times four thirds i believe
should be eight
so the six cancels with the three to
give a two and two times four is eight
and then we also have to subtract off
f x y squared so that's again minus
another full
so overall we've got 2
times 6 is 12 minus 4
so this one has discriminant 8
so our critical point must be a maximum
or a minimum
because the discriminant is positive
and then we just have to look at the
sign of f x
x which is two which is positive
so we have a minimum so therefore
minus four thirds four thirds must be
a minimum so our two critical points
in summary we've got zero zero is a
saddle point
and minus four thirds four thirds is a
minimum thank you everyone for watching
please do remember to subscribe to my
channel if you've enjoyed this video
and hopefully i'll see you again soon
you